Title: Cryptocurrency Explained With Pros and Cons for Investment
Source: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/cryptocurrency.asp
Category: General_Finance
--------------------
Key Takeaways A cryptocurrency is a digital asset based on a blockchain network that is distributed across a large number of computers. This decentralized structure allows them to exist outside the direct control of governments and central authorities.

Government agencies such as the SEC routinely regulate cryptocurrency, setting laws and regulations for crypto exchanges and online brokerage firms to follow.

Some experts believe blockchain and related technologies will disrupt many industries, including finance and law.

The advantages of cryptocurrencies include cheaper and faster money transfers and the potential for capital gains.

The disadvantages of cryptocurrencies include their price volatility, high energy consumption for mining activities, and use in criminal activities. Get personalized, AI-powered answers built on 27+ years of trusted expertise. ASK

What Is Cryptocurrency?

A cryptocurrency is a digital or virtual currency secured by cryptography, which makes it nearly impossible to counterfeit or double-spend. Cryptocurrencies exist on decentralized networks that utilize blockchain technology—a distributed ledger secured by a network of computers.

A defining feature of cryptocurrencies is that they are generally not issued by any central or governing authority. However, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) set rules that crypto exchanges, online brokerage firms, and other institutions that offer cryptocurrency must follow.

Keep your passkeys safe. Unlike fiat money, funds held in a cryptocurrency wallet aren't insured by the government. Investopedia / Tara Anand

Understanding Cryptocurrency

Cryptocurrencies are digital currencies underpinned by cryptographic systems. They enable secure online payments without the use of third-party intermediaries. "Crypto" refers to the various encryption algorithms and cryptographic techniques that safeguard these entries, such as elliptic curve encryption, public-private key pairs, and hashing functions.

Blockchain technology is central to Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies' appeal and functionality. A blockchain is essentially a set of connected blocks of information on an online ledger. Each block contains a set of transactions that have been verified by validators on a network.

This network-wide validation makes it nearly impossible to forge transactions. The contents of the online ledger must be agreed upon by a network of individual nodes, or computers that maintain the ledger.

Experts say that blockchain technology can serve multiple industries, supply chains, and processes, such as online voting and crowdfunding. For example, financial institutions like JPMorgan Chase (JPM) have developed and used blockchain technology to reduce transaction costs by streamlining payment processing.

Types of Cryptocurrency

Many cryptocurrencies were created to facilitate work done on the blockchain they are built on. For example, Ethereum's digital coin, Ether (ETH), is used to pay for validating transactions and creating new blocks. In September 2022, Ethereum switched to a proof-of-stake system. Ether inherited an additional duty as the blockchain's staking mechanism. The XRP Ledger's native cryptocurrency, XRP, facilitates transfers between different geographies.

Because so many cryptocurrencies are on the market, it's important to understand the different types. Knowing whether the coin you're looking at has a purpose can help you decide whether it is worth investing in—a cryptocurrency with a purpose is likely to be less risky than one that doesn't have a use.

Most of the time, when you hear about cryptocurrency types, you hear the coin's name. However, coin names differ from coin types. Here are some of the types you'll find, with some of the names of tokens in that category:

Utility : XRP and ETH are two examples of utility tokens. They serve specific functions on their respective blockchains.

: XRP and ETH are two examples of utility tokens. They serve specific functions on their respective blockchains. Transactional : Tokens designed to be used as a payment method. Bitcoin is the most well-known of these.

: Tokens designed to be used as a payment method. Bitcoin is the most well-known of these. Governance : These tokens represent voting or other rights on a blockchain, such as Uniswap.

: These tokens represent voting or other rights on a blockchain, such as Uniswap. Platform : These tokens support decentralized applications, also known as dApps, which are built on a blockchain, such as Solana.

: These tokens support decentralized applications, also known as dApps, which are built on a blockchain, such as Solana. Security tokens (asset-backed tokens): Tokens representing ownership of an asset, such as a tokenized stock (value transferred to the blockchain). MS Token is an example of a securitized token. If you can find one for sale, you can gain partial ownership of the Millennium Sapphire.

If you find a cryptocurrency that doesn't fall into one of these categories, you've likely discovered a new category or something that needs further investigation to ensure its legitimacy.

How to Buy Cryptocurrency

If you want to use cryptocurrency to buy products and services, you will need to visit a cryptocurrency exchange. These are businesses that allow you to buy or sell cryptocurrencies from other users at the current market price, similar to a stock. After buying the coins, you will need to transfer them to a crypto wallet or use a third-party service like Coinbase to store your coins.

If you only want to buy cryptocurrency as an investment, you may be able to do so through your online brokerage. For example, Robinhood, one of our top brokers for cryptocurrency trading, allows users to invest in Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. Several crypto ETFs, such as Spot Bitcoin and Ethereum ETFs, also give you exposure to the crypto without having to maintain their wallets. Investors may choose to hold Bitcoin ETF shares or Ether spot shares, which the SEC approved.



Is Cryptocurrency Legal?

Fiat currencies derive their authority from the government or monetary authorities. For example, the U.S. dollar is recognized and issued by the government as the official currency of the United States and is "legal tender."

However, cryptocurrencies are not issued by any government entity. Therefore, it has been difficult to make a case for their legal status in different financial jurisdictions throughout the world. It doesn't help matters that cryptocurrencies have primarily functioned outside most existing financial infrastructure. If you're interested in cryptocurrency, check the national and local laws of your country of residence. While it may be legal in one jurisdiction, it may not be legal in another.

In the U.S.

The legal status of cryptocurrencies creates implications for their use in daily transactions and trading. In June 2019, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) recommended that crypto wire transfers should be subject to the requirements of its Travel Rule, which requires AML compliance.

Important Although cryptocurrencies are considered money, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) treats them like financial assets or property for tax purposes. And, as with most other investments, if you have capital gains from selling or trading crypto, the government wants a piece of the profits. How digital assets are taxed, either as capital gains or ordinary income, depends on how long you held them for and how you used them.

U.S. courts ruled in July 2023 that cryptocurrencies are considered securities when purchased by institutional buyers but not by retail investors who buy them on exchanges.

Enthusiasts called it a crypto victory. But the exchanges are regulated by the SEC, as are coin offerings or sales to institutional investors. So, crypto is legal in the U.S., but regulatory agencies are slowly gaining ground in the industry. As of August 2025, regulators are developing rules for cryptocurrency distribution, trading, and custody that will contribute to an eventual framework.

In Asia

Japan's Payment Services Act defines Bitcoin as legal property. Cryptocurrency exchanges operating in the country must collect information about their customers and wire transfer details.

China has banned crypto exchanges, transactions, and mining in the country, but has a Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC). However, that doesn't mean mining doesn't happen.

India is reportedly formulating a crypto framework, but until it is enacted, crypto is not yet illegal. Exchanges are free to offer cryptocurrencies.

In Europe

Cryptocurrencies are legal in the European Union. Derivatives and other products that use them must qualify as financial instruments. In June 2023, the European Commission's Markets in Crypto-Assets (MiCA) regulation went into effect. The law sets safeguards and establishes rules for companies or vendors providing financial services using cryptocurrencies.

Is Cryptocurrency a Safe Investment?

Cryptocurrencies have attracted a reputation as unstable investments due to high investor losses from scams, hacks, bugs, and volatility. Although the underlying cryptography and blockchain are generally secure, the technical complexity of using and storing crypto assets can be a significant hazard to new users.

In addition to the market risks associated with speculative assets, cryptocurrency investors should be aware of the following risks:

User risk : Unlike traditional finance, you can't reverse or cancel a cryptocurrency transaction after it has already been sent. According to Ledger, a well-known crypto wallet, analysts estimate that about 11 % to 18% of bitcoins are lost for various reasons.

: Unlike traditional finance, you can't reverse or cancel a cryptocurrency transaction after it has already been sent. According to Ledger, a well-known crypto wallet, analysts estimate that about 11 % to 18% of bitcoins are lost for various reasons. Regulatory risks : The regulatory status of some cryptocurrencies is still unclear in many areas, with some governments seeking to regulate them as securities, currencies, or both. A sudden crackdown could make it challenging to sell crypto or cause a market-wide price drop.

: The regulatory status of some cryptocurrencies is still unclear in many areas, with some governments seeking to regulate them as securities, currencies, or both. A sudden crackdown could make it challenging to sell crypto or cause a market-wide price drop. Counterparty risks : Many investors and merchants rely on exchanges or other custodians to store their cryptocurrency. Theft or loss by one of these third parties could result in losing one's entire investment.

: Many investors and merchants rely on exchanges or other custodians to store their cryptocurrency. Theft or loss by one of these third parties could result in losing one's entire investment. Management risks : Due to the lack of coherent regulations, there are few protections against deceptive or unethical management practices. Many investors have lost large sums to management teams that failed to deliver a product.

: Due to the lack of coherent regulations, there are few protections against deceptive or unethical management practices. Many investors have lost large sums to management teams that failed to deliver a product. Programming risks : Many investment and lending platforms use automated smart contracts to control the movement of user deposits. An investor using one of these platforms assumes the risk that a bug or exploit in these programs could cause them to lose their investment.

: Many investment and lending platforms use automated smart contracts to control the movement of user deposits. An investor using one of these platforms assumes the risk that a bug or exploit in these programs could cause them to lose their investment. Market Manipulation: Market manipulation remains a substantial problem for cryptocurrency investors, with influential people, organizations, and exchanges promoting their favored tokens.

Despite these risks, cryptocurrencies have experienced a significant price surge, with the total market capitalization rising to approximately $2.98 trillion as of December 15, 2025. Despite the asset's speculative nature, some have created substantial fortunes by taking on the risk of investing in early-stage cryptocurrencies.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Cryptocurrency

Cryptocurrencies were introduced with the intent to revolutionize financial infrastructure. As with every revolution, however, there are tradeoffs involved. At the current stage of development for cryptocurrencies, there are many differences between the theoretical ideal of a decentralized system with cryptocurrencies and its practical implementation.

Advantages Removes single points of failure

Easier to transfer funds between parties

Removes third parties

Can be used to generate returns

Remittances are streamlined Disadvantages Transactions are pseudonymous

Pseudonymity allows for criminal uses

Have become highly centralized

Expensive to participate in some networks and earn

Off-chain security issues

Prices are very volatile



Advantages Explained

Cryptocurrencies represent a new, decentralized paradigm for money. In this system, centralized intermediaries, such as banks and monetary institutions, are not necessary to enforce trust and police transactions between two parties. Thus, a system with cryptocurrencies eliminates the possibility of a single point of failure—such as a large financial institution setting off a cascade of global crises, such as the one triggered in 2008 by the failure of large investment banks in the U.S.

Cryptocurrencies promise to make transferring funds directly between two parties easier without needing a trusted third party like a bank or a credit card company. Such decentralized transfers are secured by the use of public keys and private keys and different forms of incentive systems, such as proof of work or proof of stake.

Because they do not use third-party intermediaries, cryptocurrency transfers between two transacting parties can be faster than standard money transfers. Flash loans in decentralized finance are an excellent example of such decentralized transfers. These loans, which are processed without requiring collateral, can be executed within seconds and are mostly used in trading.

The remittance economy is testing one of cryptocurrency's most prominent use cases. Cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin serve as intermediate currencies to streamline money transfers across borders. Thus, a fiat currency is converted into Bitcoin (or another cryptocurrency), transferred across borders, and subsequently converted back into the destination fiat currency without third-party involvement.

Disadvantages Explained

Though many claim crypto to be an anonymous form of transaction, cryptocurrencies are pseudonymous. They leave a digital trail that agencies like the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) can follow. This opens up the possibility for governments, authorities, and others to track financial transactions.

Cryptocurrencies have become a popular tool for criminals to engage in nefarious activities, including money laundering and illicit purchases. The case of Dread Pirate Roberts, who ran a marketplace to sell drugs on the dark web, is already well known. Cryptocurrencies have also become a favorite of hackers who use them for ransomware activities.

In theory, cryptocurrencies are designed to be decentralized, with their wealth distributed among many parties on a blockchain. Ownership is becoming more concentrated, as witnessed by companies such as Strategy purchasing and holding them for price appreciation and investment fund managers buying them to hold in the funds they manage.

One of the conceits of cryptocurrencies is that anyone can mine them using a computer with an Internet connection. However, mining popular cryptocurrencies requires considerable energy, sometimes with daily energy use for mining only exceeding that of a household. The high energy costs and the unpredictability of mining have concentrated mining among large firms seeking to profit from the activity.

Though cryptocurrency blockchains are highly secure, off-chain crypto-related key storage repositories, such as exchanges and wallets, can be hacked. Many cryptocurrency exchanges and wallets have been hacked over the years, sometimes resulting in the theft of millions of dollars in coins.

Cryptocurrencies traded in public markets suffer from price volatility, so investments require accurate price monitoring. For example, Bitcoin's value has experienced rapid surges and crashes, climbing to nearly $65,000 in November 2021 before dropping to just over $20,000 a year and a half later. Bitcoin prices roared back by mid-2024 and reached a high of more than $124,000 by October 2025. As a result of this vast range of volatility, many people consider cryptocurrencies a speculative bubble.

Is Crypto a Good Investment? Crypto can be a good investment for someone who enjoys speculating and can financially tolerate losing everything invested. However, it is not a wise investment for someone seeking to grow their retirement portfolio or for placing savings into it for growth.

Which Crypto Is Best to Invest In? It depends on your financial circumstances, market outlook, risk tolerance, and goals. Crypto investing is generally best suited for speculators or those who can afford to incur losses. Including cryptocurrency as part of a portfolio is something that should be discussed with a financial advisor familiar with crypto.

How Does Crypto Make You Money? There are several ways cryptocurrency can make money for you. Decentralized finance applications let you loan your crypto with interest; you can stake a compatible one on a blockchain or at certain exchanges for rewards, or you can hold on to it and hope its market value increases. None of these methods is guaranteed to make money, but many people have benefited from them.

The Bottom Line

Cryptocurrencies are digital assets that are secured by cryptography. As a relatively new technology, they are highly speculative, and it is important to understand the risks involved before investing.

The comments, opinions, and analyses expressed on Investopedia are for informational purposes online. Read our warranty and liability disclaimer for more info.