Title: Federal Reserve System: What It Is and How It Works
Source: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/f/federalreservebank.asp
Category: General_Finance
--------------------
The Federal Reserve System is a network of regional banks that acts as the central bank of the United States.

What Is the Federal Reserve System (FRS)?

The Federal Reserve System (FRS) is the central bank of the United States. Often called the Fed, it is arguably the most influential financial institution in the world. It was founded to provide the country with a safe, flexible, and stable monetary and financial system. The Fed has a board of seven members and 12 Federal Reserve banks, each operating as a separate district with its own president.

There is a common misconception that the Federal Reserve System is privately owned. In fact, it combines public and private characteristics: The central governing board of the FRS is an agency of the federal government and reports to Congress. The Federal Reserve Banks that it oversees are set up like private corporations.

Key Takeaways The Federal Reserve System is the central bank and monetary authority of the United States.

The Fed works to provide the country with a safe, flexible, and stable monetary and financial system.

The Federal Reserve System is composed of a board of seven members, 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks, and the Federal Open Market Committee.

The Fed's main duties include conducting national monetary policy, supervising and regulating banks, maintaining financial stability, and providing banking services for banks.

There is a common misconception that the Federal Reserve System is privately owned; while its Board of Governors is a government agency, the regional Federal Reserve Banks are set up like private corporations.

Understanding the Federal Reserve System (FRS)

A central bank is a financial institution given privileged control over the production and distribution of money and credit for a nation, union, or group of countries. In modern economies, the central bank is usually responsible for formulating monetary policy and regulating member banks. The Fed is composed of 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks that are each responsible for a specific geographic area of the U.S.

The Fed was established by the Federal Reserve Act, which was signed by President Woodrow Wilson on Dec. 23, 1913, in response to the financial panic of 1907. Before that, the U.S. was the only major financial power without a central bank. Its creation was precipitated by repeated financial panics that afflicted the U.S. economy over the previous century, leading to severe economic disruptions due to bank failures and business bankruptcies. A crisis in 1907 led to calls for an institution that would prevent panics and disruptions.

The Fed has broad power to act to ensure financial stability, and it is the primary regulator of banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System. It also serves as the lender of last resort to member institutions. Often referred to simply as the Fed, it has what is often called its "dual mandate" of ensuring price stability and maximum employment.

The system's 12 regional Federal Banks are based in Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco.

Fed System Banks.

The Federal Reserve System's Mandate and Duties

The monetary policy goals of the Federal Reserve are twofold: to foster economic conditions that achieve stable prices and maximum sustainable employment.

The Fed's duties can be further categorized into four general areas:

Implementing national monetary policy by influencing monetary and credit conditions in the U.S. economy to ensure maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.

Supervising and regulating banking institutions to ensure the safety of the U.S. banking and financial system and to protect consumers' credit rights.

Maintaining financial system stability and containing systemic risk.

Providing financial services, including a pivotal role in operating the national payments system, depository institutions, the U.S. government, and foreign official institutions.

Image by Sabrina Jiang © Investopedia 2020

The Federal Reserve System's Organizational Structure

There are seven members of the Board of Governors. These individuals are nominated by the President and approved by the U.S. Senate. Each governor serves a maximum of 14 years. Their appointment is staggered by two years, which is intended to limit the political influences it might be subjected to when control of appointments shifts to different political parties during elections. The law also dictates that appointments represent all broad sectors of the U.S. economy.

At times, there may be an empty seat on the board, but as of May 2025, all board positions were occupied.